-------------------------------------------------------------------
## GENERATE CUSTOM DATABASE

This file describes the software used to generate the GOTTCHA databases and 
step-by-step guidiance.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### General Introduction

The GOTTCHA databases are generated with the "gottcha_db.pl" program, but requires 
as input, two pre-formatted Perl Storable-formatted files and an custom XML file
describing the sequences to be included. These files are generated by the two 
included perl scripts, "mkGottchaTaxTree.pl" and "mkGottchaXML.pl". Pre-computed
databases in FASTA format are available for both bacteria and viruses at the 
strain, species, genus, family, order, class, and phylum levels, each. Pre-
computed Eukaryotic databases are not yet available, but can be computed using 
the provided tools.

These tools are primarily Perl-based, and require at least Perl v5.8 and the
following Perl modules:

  * Algorithm::Combinatorics qw(variations_with_repetition)
  * Benchmark ':hireswallclock'
  * Bit::Vector
  * Cwd qw(abs_path)
  * Data::Dumper
  * Devel::Size qw(size total_size)
  * Fcntl qw(:flock SEEK_END)
  * feature 'switch'
  * File::Basename
  * File::Copy
  * File::Path
  * Getopt::Long
  * IO::Handle
  * Sort::Key qw(keysort)
  * Sort::Key::Radix qw(rnkeysort ukeysort usort ssort)
  * Statistics::Descriptive
  * Storable qw(store retrieve)
  * threads
  * threads::shared
  * Tie::IxHash
  * Time::HiRes
  * XML::Simple
  * YAML::XS

The splitrim tool is written in D (http://www.dlang.org) and requires an 
appropriate D compiler (see below).

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Local directory structure and sequence files

You will need local copies of NCBI's genome sequences and their associated GenBank
files. Ideally, for bacteria, you would transfer the *.fna and *.gbk files of 
(currently) ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/Bacteria to your local disk, 
yielding, say, the destination directory of "/localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/
genomes/Bacteria". Since different GI numbers exist for the same genome projects 
depending on whether you're in the "ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes" directory 
or the "ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes" directory, you should also download the *.gbk
files of ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria to local disk. You should then
have two directories:

        /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria             [*.gbk files only]
        /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/Bacteria     [*.gbk and *.fna files]

Virus sequences are located in ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses, and you 
should download the *.fna, *.ffn, and *.gbk files, so that your local directory 
should now have the following:
    
        /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses              [*.gbk,*.fna,*.ffn files]
        /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria             [*.gbk files only]
        /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/Bacteria     [*.gbk and *.fna files]

The included Perl scripts will traverse the directories you specify, looking for
the *.fna files, so be sure that a *.gbk GenBank file exists for each that you 
want to include. This should not be a problem so long as your FTP transfer wasn't
prematurely interrupted. 

A list of all the GenBank files corresponding to the sequences that will be used
for signature generation needs to be created for the next tool. The full path 
file is listed, one per line, in the list. Two lists should be generated if both
"genomes" and "genbank/genomes" GIs are desired in the final result (highly 
suggested). The following commands should be sufficient:

        $ find /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses  -name \*.gbk > genomes_viruses.txt
        $ find /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria -name \*.gbk > genomes_bacteria.txt
        $ find /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/Bacteria -name \*.gbk > genbank.txt

Then concatentate the "genomes_viruses.txt" and the "genomes_bacteria.txt" files
to generate "genomes.txt" that is used, along with the "genbank.txt" file as input
into the next step.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Generating the taxonomic tree and genome vitals references (mkGottchaTaxTree.pl)

The "mkGottchaTaxTree.pl" file will generate TWO required custom-formatted files
for the "gottcha.pl" program: the "speciesTreeGI.dmp" and "genomeVitals.dmp" 
files. Both are Perl Storable-formatted files (see http://search.cpan.org/~ams/Storable/Storable.pm
). In order to run "mkGottchaTaxTree.pl", first you will need
to download three NCBI taxonomy dump files from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy
directory. The "taxdump.tar.gz" file will provide the "names.dmp" and "nodes.dmp"
files, while the "gi_taxid_nucl.dmp.gz" will provide the "gi_taxid_nucl.dmp" file.
You will also need the "genomes.txt" and "genbank.txt" files from the previous 
step to continue. After decompressing these files, you specify them on the command
line as follows:

        $ perl mkGottchaTaxTree.pl --names=/path-to-file/names.dmp                  \
                                 --nodes=/path-to-file/nodes.dmp                  \
                                 --gi2taxid=/path-to-file/gi_taxid_nucl.dmp       \
                                 --genbank=/path-to-file/genbank.txt              \
                                 --genomes=/path-to-file/genomes.txt              \
                                 --threads=<#cores>                               \

NOTE: Make sure specify the full path to the appropriate files here (do not use "~").
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Building the XML input file (mkGottchaXML.pl)

All the sequences used as input for signature generation are organized into a 
customized XML file created by the "mkGottchaXML.pl" command. Each genome project
provided will need to be discoverable in both the "speciesTreeGI.dmp" and 
"genomeVitals.dmp" files. The full path to each genome project directory is added
to a text file. Draft genomes are distinguishable from completed genomes, so if 
both completed and draft genomes are used, they should be separated into two files,
such as "drafts.txt" and "completed.txt". Genomes need to be distinguished by headers
describing the kingdom/domain of origin: [PROKARYOTES], [VIRUSES], [EUKARYOTES] 
or [OTHERS]. Both the "draft.txt" and "completed.txt" files are of the same format. 

If you have two genome project directories for the same organism, as is the case
of the "genbank/genomes" and "genomes" issue described above, only specify the 
directories of genome project that contains the (*.fna) sequence files, and NOT 
both. So if the "genbank/genomes" directory /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/
genomes/Bacteria/Acinetobacter_baumannii_AYE_uid28921 has the relevant sequence 
files, use this project directory rather than the "genomes" directory /localdir/
ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/Acinetobacter_baumannii_AYE_uid61637. If both 
have the sequence files, choose only one! 

 Note that if you include genome sequencing projects of the same strain -- even if
from only the "genbank/genomes" directory -- it is highly likely that both genomes
will cancel each other out and there will be NO resulting signatures. Take these
two E. coli genome projects for example:
    
 > Escherichia_coli_BL21_DE3__uid20713/   
 > Escherichia_coli_BL21_DE3__uid28965/   
 >     or   
 > Escherichia_coli_DH1_uid30031/   
 > Escherichia_coli_DH1_uid52077/   

The following in a generic example of the "completed.txt" file containing genomic 
sequences from multiple sources.
 
 > [VIRUSES]   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Thielaviopsis_basicola_mitovirus_uid37715   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Thogoto_virus_uid15043   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Thottapalayam_virus_uid29841   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Thrush_coronavirus_HKU12_600_uid32701   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Thunberg_fritillary_virus_uid15483   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Tick_borne_encephalitis_virus_uid1533      5
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Tiger_puffer_nervous_necrosis_virus_uid41607   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Venezuelan_equine_encephalitis_virus_uid15302   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Viruses/Yersinia_pestis_phage_phiA1122_uid14332   
 > [PROKARYOTES]   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/Bacteria/Bacillus_anthracis_Ames_uid309   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/Bacteria/Bacillus_anthracis_CDC_684_uid31329   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/Bacteria/Bacillus_anthracis_CI_uid36309   
 > [EUKARYOTES]   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Fungi/Saccharomyces_cerevisiae_uid128   
 > /localdir/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Fungi/Cryptococcus_neoformans_var_JEC21_uid10698

NOTE: If you receive an "Unrecognized directory format" error, try removing the trailing
forward slashes "/" in these directory names.

If you would like to have completely separate signature databases for each domain 
-- such as one for Prokaryotes only -- then only populate the [PROKARYOTES] header. 
The other headers need not be provided if they do not refer to any genome projects.
The process will then be repeated for each individual kingdom/domain to generate
specific XML files, such as "prokaryotes.xml", "eukaryotes.xml", and "viruses.xml".

 The mkGottchaXML.pl file is executed with the following parameters:

        $ perl mkGottchaXML.pl --drafts=/path-to-file/drafts.txt                    \
                             --completed=/path-to-file/completed.txt              \
                             --taxTree=/path-to-file/speciesTreeGI.dmp            \
                             --vitals=/path-to-file/genomeVitals.dmp              \
                             --prefix=<XML filename prefix>                       

The RNA viral genomes will likely not have an associated *.fna file, so this 
program will automatically attempt to extract this sequence from the associated 
*.gbk file. If you do not want this to happen, add the "--noDenovoFNA" parameter. 
If the appropriate GI could not be found, the program dies. To prevent this, use
the "--skipOrgNoGI" option and the offending organism will not be included in the
XML output file. If the appropriate TAXID could not be found for any particular 
organism, the program will die. To prevent this, specify the "--continueNoMatch"
option.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Running the GOTTCHA database generator (gottcha_db.pl)

This is the resource-intensive tool that, as of Dec 31, 2012 required a 2TB RAM 
machine (distributed across all 80 available cores) to process all ~2500 prokaryote 
genome projects. RAM usage can be decreased by reducing the # of cores used, but
will also take longer. The GOTTCHA databases used in the submitted publication 
were created with the following parameters:

        $ perl gottcha_db.pl --taxIdxFile=/path-to-file/PROKARYOTES.xml                \
                        --wordSize=24                                             \
                        --prefixLength=2                                          \
                        --minUniqueFragLength=24                                  \
                        --taxLevel="SPECIES"                                      \
                        --compareSameTaxLevel                                     \
                        --doCompleteTax                                           \
                        --taxTreeFile=/path-to-file/speciesTreeGI.dmp             \
                        --pDir=/path-to-dir1,/path-to-dir2,/path-to-dir3          \
                        --outdir=/path-to-output-dir                              \
                        --dbLabel="PROKARYOTES"                                   \
                        --skipGC                                                  \
                        --nThreads=80                                             \

The wordSize is equivalent to the k-mer length used for finding exact matches. 
To improve efficiency, the k-mers are broken down into prefixes and suffixes, 
and a prefixLength of 2 is safe. The minimum length of signatures to report is 
specified with the "--minUniqueFragLength" parameter. Since this tool is resource-
intensive and IO-bound, it is best to split the processing up among as many local
drives (having separate controllers) as possible. You can specify as many partition
directories with the "--pDir" command, separating each with a comma (no spaces).
The "--outdir" must have sufficient space to report all signatures for all levels
of taxonomy; ensure this is at least 250GB to be safe. Determining the %GC of the
fragments currently slows the processing time down considerably and is HIGHLY 
recommended to be bypassed with the "--skipGC" command. 

Signatures will be reported for each organism at each taxonomic level as individual
FASTA files in the appropriate /outdir/fasta/<taxlevel> directory. It is up to 
you to concatenate them into a single, say, species FASTA file and format them 
for use with your favorite aligner.

ONCE THE GOTTCHA SIGNATURE DATABASES HAVE BEEN CREATED, METAGENOMIC SEQUENCE READS 
FROM SOME UNKNOWN SAMPLE CAN BE MAPPED TO THE DATABASE USING YOUR FAVORITE ALIGNER. 
THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBES THE WORKFLOW BY WHICH THE COMMUNITY COMPOSITION IS DESCRIBED
IN TERMS OF ORGANISM IDENTITY AND RELATIVE ABUNDANCE.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Split-trimming the sequence reads (splitrim)

The GOTTCHA workflow currently relies on exact matching of sequence reads to the
database of signatures. In order to maximize read recruitment to the signatures,
each read in the FASTQ file is split into non-overlapping 30-mers before mapping
to the database. 

To compile the D sourcecode (http://www.dlang.org), use the following command for DMD:
 
         $ dmd -O -release -inline splitrim.d

The DMD compiler is freely available at http://dlang.org/dmd-linux.html. Alternatively, 
the GNU D Compiler (gdc) is available at https://github.com/D-Programming-GDC/GDC, 
while the LLVM-based D compiler (ldc) project is found at
https://github.com/ldc-developer/ldc.

The splitting first occurs on every base whose quality is below the --minQ value
specified (default: 20). The remaining fragments are then split into non-
overlapping 30-mers as best as possible. If a fragment is between 31-59 bases 
(less than what it takes to generate two separate 30-bp fragments), it will be 
retained only if the --recycle option is specified. Although there is a --threads
option, best performance is observed between 1-2 threads only. 

         $ splitrim --inFile=/path-to-file/INSEQ.fastq --fixL=30 --recycle --ascii=33 \
             --minQ=20 --threads=1 --outPath=/path-to-splitrim-file/TRIM.fastq

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Mapping split-trimmed reads to the GOTTCHA database

Mapping the split-trimmed file to the GOTTCHA database is amenable to almost any
aligner that takes a FASTQ file as input and produces a SAM file. The typical BWA
command (version 0.7.5a-r416) we use is of the form:

         $ bwa mem -k 30 -T 0 -B 100 -O 100 -E 100 -t $THREADS                \
                /path-to-GOTTCHA-db/gottcha                                   \
                /path-to-trimmed-FASTQ-file/TRIM.fastq                        \
              > /path-to-SAM-file/SAMFILE.sam

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Profiling the GOTTCHA results (profileGottcha.pl)

You should first create a pre-parsed version of the GOTTCHA FASTA database file 
for faster subsequent runs, rather than forcing the program to repeatedly parse 
the flatfile upon every execution. You generate the parsed version of the 
database with the following command:

         $ perl /path-to-file/profileGottcha.pl                               \
            --db=/path-to-GOTTCHA-FASTA-file/gottcha.fna                      \
            --make_dmp --prefix=MYPREFIX

which will generate the file "MYPREFIX.parsedGOTTCHA.dmp". Using this parsed file 
will speed up all subsequent runs. The program currently only parses SAM files,
which is specified with --sam. Rather than specifying a single SAM file as input,
the program expects as input a file containing a list of the SAM files to parse 
(one file per line and includes the full path). This allows you to include 
multiple SAM files into a single analysis. 

        $ perl /path-to-file/profileGottcha.pl                                \
            --parsedDB=/path-to-file/MYPREFIX.parsedGOTTCHA.dmp               \
            --map=/path-to-list-of-SAM-files/LIST.txt --sam                   \
            --outdir=/path-to-outfiles/OUTDIR --prefix=PROFILE_PREFIX         \
            --trimStats=/path-to-stats-infile/STATS_INFILENAME.txt            \
            --treeFile=/path-to-file/speciesTreeGI.dmp                        \
            --genomeVitals=/path-to-file/genomeVitals.dmp                     \
            --noFastqOut --method=1
    
The option --noFastqOut suppresses the writing of the (trimmed) reads that mapped
into a "MAPPED" file and those that did not map to an "UNMAPPED" output FASTQ file.
The --treeFile and --genomeVitals files are those that were used earlier in the 
pipeline. The --trimStats file is that which is produced by the "splitrim" program
above and is used to report a few additional statistics, but is not required.

Primary analysis files produced from this run include:
    
  * PREFIX.replicon.tsv
  * PREFIX.strain.tsv
  * PREFIX.species.tsv
  * PREFIX.genus.tsv
  * PREFIX.family.tsv
  * PREFIX.order.tsv
  * PREFIX.class.tsv
  * PREFIX.phylum.tsv

Description:

> Column                         | Description
> ------------------------------ | -----------------------------------------------------------
> RANKNAME (STRAIN, SPECIES...)  | replicon name (source + plasmid/chr)
> NUM_SUBRANKS                   | no. of distinct subranks for the current rank (E.g.  the no. of SPECIES under the current GENUS)
> GPROJ_ENTRIES                  | no. of genome projects (i.e. STRAINS) under this RANK NAME
> LINEAR_LENGTH                  | N/O_LENGTH = non-overlapping length = no. of non-overlapping bases covering the unique DB
> UNIQUE_DB_LENGTH               | no. of unique bases for this organism
> FULL_REFDB_LENGTH              | no. of bases in full reference
> LINEAR_COV                     | (LINEAR_LENGTH / UNIQUE_DB_LENGTH)
> HIT_COUNT                      | no. of hits recruited to genome
> TOTAL_BP_MAPPED                | sum total of all hit lengths recruited to genome
> LINEAR_DOC                     | linear depth-of-coverage = fold coverage of sample's LINEAR_LENGTH (TOTAL_BP_MAPPED / LINEAR_LENGTH)
> UREF_DOC                       | unique reference's depth-of-coverage = fold coverage of reference's UNIQUE_DB_LENGTH (TOTAL_BP_MAPPED / UNIQUE_DB_LENGTH)
> UREF_CMAX                      | MAX COVERAGE OF REFDB POSSIBLE, GIVEN SAMPLE INPUT BASES (TOTAL_INPUT_BASES / UNIQUE_DB_LENGTH)
> FRAC_HITS_POSSIBLE             | (HIT_COUNT / TOTAL_INPUT_READS)
> FRAC_BASES_POSSIBLE            | (TOTAL_BP_MAPPED / TOTAL_INPUT_BASES)
> MEAN_HIT_LENGTH                | (TOTAL_BP_MAPPED / HIT_COUNT)
> MEAN_LINEAR_HIT_LENGTH         | (LINEAR_LENGTH / HIT_COUNT)
> best_[field name]              | the best value of this field in SUBRANKS

Other non-essential files:

  * PREFIX.giCoords.dmp
  * PREFIX.replicon.contig.coords.csv
  * PREFIX.replicon.contig.HistoByEntry.csv
  * PREFIX.replicon.contig.HistoByEntry.dmp
  * PREFIX.replicon.contig.HistoByGI.csv
  * PREFIX.replicon.contig.HistoByGI.dmp
  * PREFIX.replicon.reads.coords.csv
  * PREFIX.strain.contig.coords.tsv

You will be using the *.tsv primary analysis files. Each result is rolled up to 
the next highest taxonomy, regardless of the resolution of the GOTTCHA database 
used at the mapping step. For example, if you mapped your reads to the GENUS-level
GOTTCHA database, you will still get the high resolution *.tsv files (replicon, 
strain, and species) but also the higher taxonomic rollup results (family, order,
class, and phylum). It is important to note that the GENUS-level results you get
for mapping reads to the GENUS-level GOTTCHA database will be different than the
GENUS-level rollup results you get from mapping reads to the STRAIN-level GOTTCHA
database. The difference lies in the number of signatures available at the higher
taxonomic levels (GENUS > STRAIN), so more reads will be recruited to the GENUS-
level database versus the STRAIN-level database, and this difference will be 
noted in the two different *.genus.tsv files genereated.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
### Filtering the GOTTCHA profile (filterGottcha.pl)

This script is used to determine the organisms that are present in your read set
and does so by filtering out the false positives that may creep into your results.
There are 3 stages of filters applied. 

The first filter, --minCov, relies on the minimum linear coverage of the signatures
present to proceed to the next filter. A comprehensive anlaysis of synthetic 
metagenomes have determined that a linear coverage between 0.1% - 0.5% provides
the optimal range for this first filter. 

The second pair of filters, --minMLHL and --cCov, attempt to remove read stacking
on signatures that may result from background genomes (eukaryotic, perhaps) or 
some other novel genome that contain some features of the reference genome 
signatures. This pair of filters is based on the assumption that the sequencing
technology will uniformly (and randomly) generate signatures so that reads should
not significantly stack upon signatures, but rather spread out across them if the
host organism is truly present. The minimum Mean Linear Hit Length (--minMLHL) is
defined as the LINEAR LENGTH (total non-overlapping length of signatures covered)
divided by the hit count to that signature length. Stacking will decrease this 
ratio, which MAY be a sign of a false positive. The other possibility is that 
the organism is present at high abundance and this ratio will necessarily decrease
as more and more of the signatures are covered. Thus, if the minimum MLHL is below
that specified by --minMLHL, the associated organism is removed as a false positive
unless the linear coverage is above the critical coverage (--cCov).

The third pair of filters is based solely on a minimum number of hits and minimum
length of signatures that must be covered in order for an organism to be considered
present. These numbers are highly dependent on the amount of sequencing done. A
minimum linear length (--minLen) of 100-bp and a minimum number of hits (--minHits)
of 10 are conservative values for a single lane of Illumina HiSeq.

        $ perl /path-to-file/filterGottcha.pl                                 \
              --strain=/path-to-file/variantStrainLookup.dmp                  \
              --species=/path-to-file/variantSpeciesLookup.dmp                \
              --genus=/path-to-file/genusLookupBySpecies.dmp                  \
              --family=/path-to-file/familyLookupBySpecies.dmp                \
              --order=/path-to-file/orderLookupBySpecies.dmp                  \
              --class=/path-to-file/classLookupBySpecies.dmp                  \
              --phylum=/path-to-file/phylumLookupBySpecies.dmp                \
              --taxlookup=/path-to-file/taxLookupBySpecies.dmp                \
              --taxLevel=TAXLEVEL                                             \
              --dir=OUTDIR                                                    \
              --prefix=PREFIX                                                 \
              --method=1                                                      \
              --minCov=0.005                                                  \
              --minMLHL=5                                                     \
              --cCov=0.006                                                    \
              --minLen=100                                                    \
              --minHits=10
         
where TAXLEVEL="species", "genus", etc. 

The results produced by this program will list the organism(s) at all taxonomic
levels from STRAIN to PHYLUM, their linear length, total bases mapped, linear 
depth of coverage, and the normalized linear depth of coverage. The linear depth
of coverage (DOC) is used to calculate the relative abundances of each organism
or taxonomic name in the sample:

        Relative Abundance = 
         (linear DOC of organism X) / [sum of linear DOC of all organisms] of Organism X

The eight Perl Storable (*.dmp) files are produced by a rearrangement of the 
speciesTreeGI.dmp file used in earlier steps. They are generated with the 
"makeVariantTaxLookups.pl" script:
        
        $ perl /path-to-file/makeVariantTaxLookups.pl /path-to-file/speciesTreeGI.dmp

